Implementing Digital Traceability to Mitigate Resource Depletion in Global Crop Agriculture Supply Chains ( sẽ nói thêm target 12.2, 12.4 và 12.5 sau)
1. Introduction 
The population explosion to 9 billion by 2050 and urbanization will create pressure on the production system and the food supply chain globally, leading to a severe lack of natural resources. These issues have altered the climate, making living conditions increasingly unhealthy (Gunapala et al., 2025). Additionally, about one-third of the food ( about 2.2 billion tons) is wasted in the whole supply chain, while 13% of food loss occurs from harvest to retail, which reflects inefficiencies in supply chain management (UNFCCC, 2024). With that, agriculture faces the challenges of how to increase productivity to adapt to a high level of consumption while ensuring the responsibility of the environment, society, and economy (Boix-Fayos and de Vente, 2023) 
Through using theories and frameworks of sustainable supply chain management, this study proposes the implementation of a digital traceability system in crop agriculture by using real-time data to monitor resource use (soil, water, and energy) (Santos et al., 2026). From that, it aims to minimize the depletion of natural resources. This purpose is linked directly to Target 12 of the UN's Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) on Responsible Consumption and Production in 2030 (The Global Goals, 2025). Therefore, this plan will assess whether applying traceability can go beyond the short-term goal of avoiding trade fraud to become a core accountability management tool, which helps manage natural resources effectively. ( quản lý hoá chất và giảm thiểu rác thải)
2. Background and research 
2.1 Strategic Context 

Using the STEEPED framework to assess macroeconomic factors impacting crop agriculture and understand how these pressures contribute to exacerbating natural depletion.
In terms of environmental factors, the raw materials like freshwater, rare earth metals, and fossil fuels are seeing their reserves dwindle (Shahzad et al., 2023; Parajuli, Thoma and Matlock, 2019). Meanwhile, 70% freshwater is used for agriculture, but it is proving to be inefficient, with outdated irrigation systems leading to massive waste (Grafton et al., 2018). With that, intensive agricultural methods not only contribute to soil degradation and water pollution, but also increase N₂O emissions from using synthetic fertilizers and burning of crop residues (Bhatia, Jain and Pathak, 2013). Furthermore, research demonstrates that every 1% of value generated is associated with a 1.4% increase in the scarcity of essential resources like soil and water. The long-term consequence is climate change, driving down harvest yields from soil degradation and extreme weather. At the same time, the quality of crops also suffers (Lal, 2009); specifically, higher CO2 concentrations reduce the amount of protein and minerals found in plants (Loladze, 2014).

In legal aspects, for example, regulations such as the UK Environment Act 2021 (UK Government, 2021) and the EU Deforestation Regulation (EUDR) (Europa.eu, 2023) require businesses to be transparent about their environmental impact. However, a major barrier is the lack of data. Currently, the farm stage accounts for more total food loss than the manufacturing and retail sectors combined (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2026), but it still lacks real-time monitoring. Major companies such as Tesco and Waitrose have strict procedures, yet they still depend on static certifications like Global GAP. As admitted by the UK Government Food Strategy Report, this lack of practical monitoring data leads to the overuse of chemicals and directly hinders the achievement of SDG 12.

Social factors are creating dual pressure on resources. On one hand, the lack of workers due to urbanization forces food companies or farmers to increase the use of pesticides and herbicides to replace manual labor (Castro-Vargas et al., 2025). This can kill soil microorganisms and cause soil compaction. On the other hand, the new consumption trend, for example, the high demand for avocados and almonds, has led to excessive groundwater extraction in Chile and California (Yipinstitute.org, 2024). It clearly demonstrates how social behavior is impacting the sustainable ecosystem.


 2.2 Dimensions of Responsibility

In the global crop agriculture supply chains, smallholder farmers, agricultural workers, and residents in farming regions is directly affected by resource scarcity. The relationship between this group and retail companies is often challenged by power asymmetry (Glavee-Geo, Engelseth and Buvik, 2021; Bogomolova et al., 2026). Price pressure from big companies forces farms to exploit soil resources to maintain short-term profit. Hence, to solve this problem, a responsible strategy requires businesses to shift from a traditional mindset to regenerative systems (Howard et al., 2019). This could be operationalized through specific indicators such as water use intensity and soil carbon, ensuring input resources for the future.

At the organization, the main responsibility lies with supply chain- leading food companies or downstream businesses, which influence production standards, price, and resource use of suppliers. The big barrier to achieving target SDG 12 is internal conflicts of interest, as shareholders prioritize investing in short-term profits over long-term investments in resource conservation. Thereby, responsible governance requires agri-companies to protect natural resources as a strategic business for maintaining competitiveness and long-term survival, rather than considering it an incurred cost (Christopher, 2023, 32-37). Otherwise, there is a diversity of environmental management tools, such as ISO 14001, which support standardized processes and enhance transparency (Matanda et al., 2014). However, this will be less effective when the imbalance in financial and technological resources among partners occurs. If companies only impose standards without providing financial and technical support, small partners or farms could struggle to comply. Thus, it is hard to achieve the goals of SDG 12 (Lima et al., 2025)

Running out of natural resources has a direct impact on consumers through rising agricultural prices caused by increased production costs and low-nutrient fruits due to soil degradation. In this context, consumers play a role in shaping supply chain behavior. The pressure of the market is a motivation for companies to establish transparent environmental policies (Grant et al., 2023). However, the main challenge is balancing the desire for low prices with the responsibility of resource conservation. Therefore, to contribute to achieving SDG 12, consumers should recognize that higher prices may reflect the true costs of resource restoration instead of a financial burden 

2.3 Critical Evaluation


Crop agriculture in some countries operates in a linear model (take-make- dispose), based on exploiting resources without control. They focus on short-term production (Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019). Suppliers like farms or small businesses often burn agricultural by-products like straw, husks, and pulp, and directly discharge processing wastewater into the environment. As a result, the natural cycle of soil will disappear over time, making the land more prone to erosion. These actions also boosted GHG emissions; for example, in India, the amount of GHG emissions from agricultural by-products increased by 75% since 2011 (Deshpande et al., 2023), to about 1.3 tons CO₂e/ha each year. Under governance point, this reflects a gap in nutrient management, where organizations focus only on profit while ignoring the planet.

 In contrast, the circular economy offers a strategy to address environmental issues (Ortiz-de-Montellano et al., 2023) by eliminating waste from the design stage and keeping materials within value loops (Mestre and Cooper, 2017). In an Indian company, they used aromatic plant waste to reuse as organic fertilizer, then applied it back to the crops (Singh et al., 2024). This helps decreased over reply on exploiting new resources and reduces input costs. Normally, this model helps keep nutrients in the soil for efficient plant uptake. Therefore, it is important to test the soil to determine which nutrients are excessive. This enables business apply fertilizers and waste according to actual crop demand because too much water increases nutrient losses, while too little water limits nutrient uptake. All the activities depend on data visibility to make decisions more accurate and reduce resource waste. However, applying this model is not only a technical issue but also an infrastructure and economic challenge. In rural areas, the lack of collection hubs where agricultural residues can be stored and processed (Parajuli et al,. 2019; Humberto et al., 2025), combined with operation costs higher than short-term benefits, are barriers that prevents suppliers from adopting change (Hilmi et al., 2024). Moreover, yields could decline in the early transition period because the farming system needs time to rebalance (Enock Siankwilimba et al., 2025). When biological methods are applied, beneficial microbial communities need time to recover, and soil health improves. The role of responsible governance must be demonstrated at that time through supporting technology and sharing benefits between the organization and small suppliers (Zhong et al., 2022).
 
Figure 1: Linear Economy and Circular Economy Models in Crop Agriculture Supply Chain

2.3 Proposed solution
Based on the analysis in the previous section, this proposed solution focuses on establishing a digital traceability system, which is widely acknowledged as a data management system to achieve SDG 12 goals more effectively and support the transition of suppliers/companies to a circular economy in crop agriculture. The system collects data, stores, and makes transparent all cultivation actions from the origin of input resources, the volume of water and chemicals used during the crop growing process. Furthermore, the methods of handling excess by-products are also stored. This data will be standardized and audited to serve sustainability KPIs, including inorganic fertilizer usage per hectare, by-product recycling rate, cubic meters of water consumed per unit of product, etc. 
However, to implement this method, it is necessary to use tools such as IoT sensors embedded deep in the soil to measure soil moisture, combined with smart irrigation systems that spray below optimal thresholds. With that, this also reduces the amount of water usage for irrigation, resulting in resource management efficiency. This tool has the ability to analyze soil nutrients, which enables farms to apply precision fertilization processes, is a way to decrease excess inputs. With that, this also prevents harmful chemicals from leaching into groundwater and reduces dependence on depleting fossil-based fertilizers. All data is stored on blockchain and synchronized across stages in the supply chain. It aims to analyze data and provide real-time transparency to stakeholders, as an effort to eliminate the lack of transparency in sustainability reports. On the other hand, this transparency also serves as a mechanism that exposes resource utilization weaknesses, thereby imposing reputational and compliance burdens. Consequently, a strategic decision grounded in strong governance and higher risk acceptance is required. 
Input factors	Current issues	System impact
Fertilizer	40-60% over-application, causing pollution and wasting mineral resources	Apply according to actual needs, reduce usage by 30-40%, extend the lifespan of mineral resources
Water	Irrigation based on experience, wasteful and causing erosion	Precise irrigation based on soil moisture, reduce water usage by 30-50%, conserve groundwater sources
Soil	Degradation	Continuous soil health monitoring, restore soil organic matter, prevent desertification
Figure 2: Impact of Digital Traceability System on key Agricultural Input Resources
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2773078625000603
2.4 Implementation plan
There is a need to implement traceability in global crop agriculture that follows a phased roadmap. In the short-term phase, the main focus is improve basic infrastructure at farms, which could gain raw data in a stable and continuous way. After that, once enough reliable data is collected, the system moves to the optimization phase at the level of agricultural procurement companies, which need to meet higher standards.
Period	Main activities	Methods	Output


PLAN (2-3 months)	1. Define strategic objective and SMART( reduce fertilizer by 25%, water 30%)
2. Design the technological architecture and IOT network to monitor soil moisture, PH)
3. Build operational processes and SOPs	Conduct a current state, analyze historical data.
Analysis of actual resource usage demand based on map
Assign clear responsibilities for stakeholders	Develop a set of target KPIs and detailed action plan
Layout diagram and data system structure
SOPs



DO (6-12 months)	1. Deploy technology infrastructure

2. Training for partner/employees

3. Connecting with partners handling agricultural by-products
    Install IoT devices (Gateway, LoRa/NB-IoT) and set up the cloud platform
Communication and on-site field training to minimize resistance to change.
Record by-products types accurately, volumes, locations	Real-time data collection system 

Use the data entry system proficiently

Purchasing entities can search for raw material sources on the system, with all transactions recorded to verify the by-product reuse rate


CHECK ( regular)	1. Monitoring via Dashboard

2.Audit and verify data 
3. Collect feedback from stakeholder networks	Analyze operational and management indicators
 Check irregularities of data
Survey, interview
    Make report of progress and resource utilization
The data is verified to control the risks 
Reporting on experience and satisfaction evaluation

ACT (2-3months)	1. Optimize System Performance
2. Scale up	Adjust the parameters to ensure maximum accuracy or align with industry standard
    Successfully improved system applicable across the supply chain
Figure 3: PDCA Implementation Roadmap 
3. Risk Analysis 
3.1 Identify risk
The traceability exposes potential risks, including financial burdens, information asymmetry, and data reliability. First of all, this implementation requires a significant investment and time to build technological infrastructure, especially since IoT devices and blockchain data storage are very expensive. Thus, farms in rural areas could face difficulties due to unstable networks, and these costs are often higher than their profits from their crops. Secondly, the power asymmetry could occur between firms and farms. Although the data on volume, water usage, and fertilizer input are collected centrally, the firm can analyze data from numerous farms to fully understand the production situation. While farms are limited to their own local data, they can face price suppression or be forced into disadvantageous terms. Lastly, cybersecurity is where external attacks and fraud risks can happen at any time. Even though the data cannotchange after input, as it is transferred throughout multiple intermediaries, this technology cannot verify the initial input. Hence, these data could be added manually with false figures to do "greenwashing," which fails to achieve the transparency goal of SDG 12.5.
This method also has indirect risks. The impact of natural disasters such as storms, floods, and droughts can destroy technological devices, as the hardware is all installed outdoors, although this risk has a low likelihood of occurrence. Beyond that, the digital traceability only monitors direct partners (tier 1). In deeper tiers of the supply chain, like fertilizer manufacturers and energy input suppliers (tier 2, tier 3), they often have high emission levels and engage in direct resource extraction. These suppliers are out of the monitoring scope of the downstream businesses. The firm/farm can be associated with environmentally harmful activities without being aware of it.
3.2 Critical Assessment of Risks 
Risk profile assessment must prioritise critical paths with the most potential to cause systemic disruption. Based on the risk matrix framework  (Manuj & Mentzer, 2008), the result shows that a high level of risk is not only related to technical factors but also primarily comes from data and finance issues. Especially, the risk of inaccurate traceability data (R2) is considered one of the most serious threats. If the input data is false, resource management decisions based on it will become flawed. This directly reduces the ability to use resources effectively in implementing SDG 12 goals. In this case, the contrast between the risk of cybersecurity (R4) and natural disasters (R6) indicates that the level of impact must be the determining factor in prioritisation. Although both of the risks have a low likelihood of occurrence, R4 has a high-level risk due to the serious consequences of data loss or system disruption, whereas R6 is only rated as low risk. This reflects that the rare risks of causing systemic catastrophe must be given priority for mitigation over risks that cause less damage, even if they occur more frequently. 


 Figure 4: Risk Assessment Matrix for Digital Traceability Implementation (Bảng này dựa vào lý thuyết  "High Impact, Low Probability )
3.3 Risk Treatment
Based on Figure 4, mitigation measures are focused on three main groups. In the first group, it is necessary to solve the high-probability risks with major consequences. To limit financial risk, the companies and farms should adopt a step-by-step approach by establishing basic systems first, like IoT for a single plot of land, rather than tackling the entire supply chain. With that, the acceptance of limited visibility at deeper tiers (R7) is an essential trade-off to ensure focus on core financials before expanding into subsequent development phases. Additionally, data accuracy (R2) must be ensured through standardizing data entry processes and minimizing manual intervention. Manual data input is only authorized for the management level in the case of incidents, combined with annual audits to verify anomalous data. Lastly, to secure the system, cybersecurity (R4) should be strictly managed through an access control mechanism and data encryption according to international standards, such as ISO/IEC 27001, which is a standard for an information security management system. Beyond monitoring, it is crucial for the assigned IT staff to perform routine system checks that will help detect vulnerabilities early and protect production operations from negative impacts.
At the medium level of risk, the organizations should build trust with farms through the SRM model to reduce power asymmetry risk (R3). This plays a role in ensuring transparency through clear contracts. Instead of suppressing prices, firms should commit to long-term purchasing agreements and share analyses and technical insights with them to support production. In addition, this reliable traceability data will serve as the core foundation for reassessing the achievement of sustainability KPIs (R5). Although transparency may expose weaknesses in production processes, organizations can fall short of their initial commitments. Instead of viewing this as a failure, businesses should approach data as a learning tool to adjust governance strategies, thereby gradually achieving the goals of SDG 12.
Regarding natural disaster risks (R6), the priority is strictly on hardware protection and contingency planning. The outdoor device should have a weather-resistant cover (IP67/68 standards) to avoid rain and dust. All devices and infrastructure should be covered by insurance to ensure financial compensation in the event of damage or failure.
However, to limit all risk and reach the SDG 12 goals, crop agriculture needs unified policies from governments in local countries. The government should establish national standards aligned with international standards like ISO 22005 	and support financing for small farms to buy IoT devices. Especially, building a legal framework to protect data ownership rights is necessary. This prevents data exploitation for a negative purpose by big companies.
4. Conclusion
The resource depletion in global crop agriculture, including soil degradation, water waste, and fertilizer overuse, reflects deficiencies in supply chain governance. Specifically, there are still practices of maintaining a linear model, focusing on short-term yields that have a negative impact on long-term food security and the health of consumers. Thus, digital traceability has become a key resource management tool when shifting management practices from subjective experience to empirical evidence. The real-time data visibility support transition to the circular economy by inputting data from IoT sensors. This allows for the optimization of water and fertilizers, leading to efficient resource management that mitigates resource depletion. However, this method exposes financial risk with the high initial investment and the imbalance of power in data. which can be significant barriers to reaching the SDG 12 goal. This implementation is only truly effective when supported by capable governance and strict cybersecurity measures to prevent system disruptions. With the support of the government, traceability is not a financial burden to small farms, resulting in building a crop agriculture with global sustainability goals.









Appendix A
From the very first stage of learning this module, I had a very basic and narrow-minded view of the responsibility of the supply chain. I grew up in a developing country like Vietnam, where economic development is prioritized over sustainability. Besides, my mindset was strongly influenced by my previous company, which is a laundry detergent company. I understood that the role of the supply chain was to ensure smooth operations in all company activities, and the main core of the company was to generate profits. Hence, I thought the company mainly focused on people, profit, and product to develop strategies.
During the lectures, I went through and tried to understand all the given frameworks and theories. Based on the knowledge, I realized that the global issues, such as climate change and resource depletion, are partly driven by weak supply chain management at the manufacturing company. Especially, the Triple Bottom Line (TBL) of John Elkington (1997) significantly changed the way I think, and I had the same question as Elkington: "Can we make and sell this in a way that is good for the people doing the making? What impact will this have on our community? What impact will this have on the environment?" Based on this question, I researched and explored that in order to develop sustainably in the future, the company not only focuses on financial profit but also considers social responsibility (People) and environmental stewardship (Planet). With smooth supply chain operation, the company must find methods for reducing waste and greenhouse gas emissions from manufacturing into the environment and use natural resources effectively. In addition, the responsibility of the company lies in ensuring ethical behavior with employees, stakeholders, and the community. I went through companies like Unilever and P&G, and realized that they have successfully applied TBL in supply chain management by investing in social activities and setting sustainability targets each year.
As a consumer, I will change my consumption behavior by researching the origin of products and buying products that align with sustainable values. Because consumers are a company’s main stakeholders, moving from awareness to action is one way to support the company in applying TBL.
 
If I become a supply chain manager in the future, the first thing I would do is apply the TBL framework to improve the organization’s sustainable development. For example, in a laundry detergent company, it is important to ensure a safe working environment for manufacturing workers due to their exposure to toxic chemicals. With that, I will prioritise choosing materials with a bio-based active ingredient and a recyclable packaging design, which provides transparency for consumers. These actions create a competitive advantage that allows the company to generate profits from green products
 
In summary, this module sharpens my understanding of a responsible supply chain, especially in TBL. It became clear that profit remains a business priority; it cannot sustain long-term success. As environmental issues are increasing, international policies force companies to consider their responsibilities to communities rather than focusing only on individual corporate benefits.

